So last time we proved the following theorem that if I have a convergent series,
then this implies that the limit as n goes to infinity of x of n equals 0.
So a natural question is, you know, as a beginning,
the first thing that's math class does the converse hold.
Is this a two-way street or a one-way street?
So if the individual terms in this series converges to 0, does this imply that the series converges?
And I'm sure you answered this question in some form in a previous calculus class,
and the answer to this question is no.
So what's the counter example?
It's a so-called harmonic series, which corresponds to kind of our favorite sequence,
which converges to 0.
So we'll state this as a theorem.
The series sum from n equals 1 to infinity of 1 over n does not converge.
So how are we going to prove this theorem by showing a sequence of partial sums?
A subsequence of partial sums for this guy does not converge.
So if it were to converge, then the sequence of partial sums converges,
and therefore every subsequence of partial sums converge.
So what's the strategy?
We're going to show that there exists a subsequence of partial sums here.
Let's make this mk.
So remember the partial sums are simply summing up the first, so the index here is m sub k.
So the first m sub k terms when we're in diverges.
So this is enough to show that the full series doesn't converge again.
Because if it did converge, the partial sums, the sequence of partial sums converges,
and therefore every subsequence of partial sums converges.
So if we're able to show there exists a subsequence which diverges, then we're done.
In fact, what we're going to do is something a little bit stronger.
We're going to show that there exists a subsequence of partial sums,
which not only diverges, but is unbounded.
And therefore the entire sequence of partial sums is unbounded.
So if we're able to show there exists a subsequence which is unbounded,
then the entire sequence of partial sums is unbounded, so it can't converge.
Because remember, convergent sequences imply bounded sequences.
So we're going to look at when m sub k is dietic.
So for some reason I switched indices from k to l in my note.
So instead we're going to go from m sub l.
So let l be a natural number, and we'll consider the partial sum corresponding
to adding up the first two to the l terms.
Now you may ask why two to the l, why not three to the l?
Well, four to the l will be a subsequence of that.
But two to the l is you could do three to the l, you could do five to the l.
But two to the l seems is this sufficient for our purposes.
So what we're going to do is we're going to take this partial sum and bound it from below by something which is quite large.
So first off, all of these partial sums are bounded from below by zero, right?
There are some of non-negative terms.
So we write as two to the l, this is equal to one plus a half plus.
And I'm going to put parentheses around that plus a third plus a fourth plus a fifth plus a sixth plus a seventh plus an eighth.
So how I'm grouping these terms is I'm grouping them according to whether the denominator falls between a power of two and the next power of two.
And then plus.
To the l minus one plus one plus one over two to the l.
Now I can write this partial sum.
So I've grouped terms this way. What is this in terms of precise symbols?
This is one plus sum from lambda equals one to l.
Sum from n equals two to the lambda minus one plus one to the lambda one over n.
So these lambdas are now parameterizing whether what power of two on that.
So when lambda equals one, I'm at this block.
One lambda equals two. I'm at this block.
And then I'm summing up the terms that have denominator between that power and the next of two.
So I have this.
And now I bound that sum from below.
Because again, I'm trying to show that this sequence of partial sums is unbounded.
So I bound it from below.
I sum from lambda equals one to l.
Sum from n equals two to the lambda minus one plus one to the lambda.
And now for each of these, n is between two to the lambda.
Now for n between these two numbers, n is one over n is always bigger than or equal to when I plug in the biggest bound here, two to the lambda.
Okay.
And now I just have a sum.
So over n, but there's no n in this term.
So I just add up all the number of terms in a given block.
And this is equal to, so first I have one over two to the lambda coming from here.
And then sum from n equals two to the lambda minus one plus one to the lambda times one.
So again, I'm kind of going a little slow here.
And this is just equal to l one over two to the lambda times the number of terms I have here, which is two to the lambda minus one.
Two to the lambda minus one plus one.
So this minus this plus one.
So this is equal to one plus lambda equals one to l one over two lambda.
And then, so this one cancels with this one.
And then I have two to the lambda minus one, which I can bring out.
So this is just one.
Okay. And I get one plus sum from lambda equals one to l.
And this two to the lambda cancels with this two to the lambda.
And I'm left with just a half.
Okay.
And this is big.
And this is equal to, now remember, there's no sum here in lambda.
So this is just one plus l over two.
Okay.
So what did we do?
We basically showed that each of these blocks is bounded from below by a half.
That's this term that we get right here in the end.
Yeah. And we can see this if we just kind of go through the first three terms, which I have written here.
So one half is clearly bounded below by a half.
One third plus a fourth is bounded below by a fourth plus a fourth, because a third is bigger than that.
So a fourth plus a fourth is a half.
If I look at this next block, that's one over five is bigger than or equal to one over eight.
So is one over six. So is one over seven.
So this sum is bigger than or equal to one eighth plus one eighth plus one eighth plus one eighth,
which equals a half plus and then so on.
So maybe I should have said that before.
I went into the actual computation.
But in the end, we get that this sub sequence of partial sums as to the 2L.
So let me just summarize.
This is bigger than or equal to l plus two over two.
Okay.
And as l goes, as l gets very large, this thing gets very large.
So this implies s to the 2L.
This sub sequence, l equals one to infinity, is unbounded, which implies that the full sub sequence or the full sequence of partial sums is unbounded.
And therefore the sequence is not the sequence of partial sums is not converged.
And therefore that series does not converge.
Okay.
All right. So we see that the converse is not hold for that question or for that theorem.
I will just make a very passing mention to the fact that there are fields for which that does hold.
So not ordered fields because again, ordered fields with the least upper bound property have to be have to be r.
And therefore we've just shown that the converse of that theorem does not hold.
But in fact, if you look at the so-called periodic numbers, they do have this property that if the sequence of terms converges to zero, then the series converges.
But we will never see periodic numbers.
I just wanted to do a little lip service to that fact that there are at least fields of numbers that do have this property.
Okay. So we had a theorem about limits of sequences and how they interact with algebraic operations.
This naturally implies a theorem about series.
So let alpha be an r.
And let's suppose we have two convergent series.
Then if I look at the series alpha xn plus yn.
So the new terms, so the terms of my new series are alpha times x of n plus y sub n. This is a convergent series.
And the sum of this series is equal to kind of what you expect.
So the sum of the series alpha xn plus yn is equal to alpha times the sum of xn plus the sum of yn.
So this theorem follows essentially, or kind of immediately, from what we did for sequences.
So this is partial sum satisfy.
If I look at some stopping at m alpha xn plus yn, now just by the linearity of just adding up, finally many terms, I'm not going to put something down below because I really don't need to.
So this is equal to alpha times the partial sum of x sub n plus the partial sum corresponding to y sub n.
And so we're assuming this sequence of partial sums converges and this sequence of partial sums converges.
So therefore this term on the right hand side converges, which implies the left side converges.
So by the linear properties of limits, namely that the limit of the sum is the sum of the limits.
And multiplication just by fixed real numbers, commutes with taking limits, we get that limit as m goes to infinity.
So the partial sum corresponding to the new series equals alpha plus xn plus yn.
And that's the end.
Alright, so now remember we had certain sequences, which we could tell whether they converge.
So we could tell them that they converge kind of a little bit easier than just an arbitrary sequence.
So we could tell them that they converge.
So this is a non-negative terms that I'm adding up.
Because the partial sums corresponding to a series that has non-negative terms form a monotone increasing sequence.
And that's not too hard to show.
So this is the following theorem.
So this is about, now we're going to discuss a little bit about sequences which, or look at sequences which have non-negative terms.
So the theorem is the following.
The sequence of partial sums, S sub n, so let's actually, is bounded.
And again, I mean the way we see this is just that when these terms are non-negative, the sequence of partial sums is monotone.
So here's the proof. It's quite easy.
So we have for all n, natural number, make that m.
So if I look at S sub n plus 1, this is equal to, so this is the m plus 1 partial sum, sum from n equals 1 to m plus 1, x sub n, this is equal to sum from n equals m, x n plus x m plus 1.
And now the x m plus 1 term is non-negative, right? We're assuming all the terms are non-negative.
So this right-hand side, so this is certainly bigger than or equal to sum from n equals 1 to m of x n and that equals sm.
So just summarizing for all natural numbers m, this m plus 1 is bigger than or equal to sm.
Yeah, if I just keep adding non-negative things, the partial sums are getting bigger.
So partial sums is a monotone.
So maybe I should have stated this slightly differently just so that you don't think this is part of one of the if and only if, I mean this is the assumption that we have for this whole statement.
Suppose this, so the conclusion is that this converges if and only if the sequence of partial sums is bounded.
So based on the assumption that all the terms are non-negative, we see that the sequence of partial sums is monotone increasing.
That's by what we prove for sequences, every monotone increasing sequence converges if and only if it's bounded.
Okay, and that's it.
Okay, so now not every series we look at does have non-negative terms, but we can always form a certain series from those terms to make a new non-negative,
a new series with non-negative terms which gives us information about the original series. What am I going on about and look at the convergence properties of that new series.
So we have the following definition that a series converges absolutely.
We say we have absolute convergence.
If the series formed by taking the absolute values of these terms, if this series converges.
Okay, so what I was trying to get at before I stated this definition is that absolute convergence implies usual convergence.
If I had this series converging absolutely, then the original series converges.
Okay, now before I prove this theorem, let me prove a little small theorem. I can't remember if I gave it for an assignment or not.
But it's essentially a triangle inequality for however many terms you like.
So we'll prove this theorem in just a minute, but first let me prove the following theorem that if m is bigger than or equal to 2 and x1 up to xm, r and r, then sum from n equals 1 to m,
xn, take the absolute value of this sum, this is less than or equal to sum from n equals 1 to m of the absolute value.
Okay, when m equals 2, this is just the usual form of the triangle inequality.
So m equals 2, this is just saying x1 plus x2 is always less than or equal to x1 plus x2, which is just the triangle inequality.
Okay, but typically how life works, at least in analysis, if you can do it for two things, then you can do it for n things or m things in this case by induction.
And so that's how we're going to prove this. So we'll first prove this triangle inequality by induction. So prove now.
And the induction proofs we've done so far in, little n is our thing that we're inducting on.
So one in this statement m is the thing, induction on m. Okay, so let's look at the base case, which is m equals 2.
So then this is just the triangle inequality for two real numbers that we've already proved before.
Okay, x1 plus x2 and absolute value is always less than or equal to sum of x1 plus the sum of x2.
I mean sum of absolute value of x1 plus n to x, the absolute value of x2.
So the base case is fine. So now we do the inductive step.
So I'll assume the statement that I want to prove, usually I used m, but now I'll go to the next letter l going in reverse alphabetical order.
Suppose if x1, xl, and r.
So let's actually instead of just restating all that, just call the statement star.
So suppose star holds 4m equals l. And now we want to prove that star holds for m equals l plus 1.
Now we want to show star holds for m equals l plus 1.
Okay, so let x1 up to xl plus 1 be in r.
Then if I look at the sum, sum from n equals 1 to l plus 1 xn.
This is equal to sum from n equals 1 to l xn plus xl plus 1, an absolute value.
By the usual triangle inequality for two terms, this is less than or equal to sum from n equals 1 to l of xn and absolute value of xl plus 1 by usual triangle inequality.
And now this term, since I'm assuming m equals l holds.
So the m equals l case says this is less than or equal to sum from n equals 1 to l of xn plus xl plus 1, an absolute value.
So this is by inductive hypothesis. And this is just equal to sum from n equals 1 to l plus 1 xn.
So we've proven the case for now m equals l plus 1.
And that concludes the proof of this generalized triangle inequality with arbitrary number of terms.
So let's get back to proving the theorem that absolute convergence implies convergence.
So we'll do that by proving that absolute convergence implies that the series is koshi.
So proof, and this is of the theorem just before the theorem we proved that absolute convergence implies usual convergence.
So we will prove that in fact this series is koshi assuming that assuming absolute convergence.
And from last time we had proved the statement or at least has followed from statement for sequences that a koshi series converges.
So we have to prove that the series is koshi. Remember this means for all epsilon positive there exists a natural number m such that for all l bigger than m bigger than or equal to m.
If I look at the sum from n equals m plus 1 to l of xn, this is less than epsilon.
So let epsilon be positive.
So since we're assuming that the series is absolutely convergent, this implies that the series with absolute values here is also koshi.
So that means that there exists a natural number m sub zero such that for all l bigger than m bigger than or equal to m sub zero.
So if I look at the sum of absolute values from n plus 1 to l, this is less than epsilon. Now this should have an absolute value on the outside, but this is a sum of non-negative terms so the absolute value can be removed.
I mean you can essentially see where we're going based on what's written on the board, what we want to prove and what we know and this triangle inequality.
So choose m to be m sub zero.
Then if l is bigger than m is bigger than or equal to m, then absolute value of the sum from n plus 1 to l, sub n.
This is less than or equal to the sum from n equals m plus 1 to l of the absolute values of x sub n by the theorem we proved just a minute ago.
And this is less than epsilon by our choice of m. m is equal to m zero and for m zero we have this inequality right here.
This series is Koshy which implies it converges.
So basically the only test you know for determining when a series is convergent is in one of two possibilities.
Either a it has a very simple form and it's not so all the terms are not non-negative but the terms have a very simple form.
That's the alternating series test which will discuss in a little bit possibly the next lecture.
And then when a series converges absolutely we have a lot of tests for that.
We'll see that series which converge absolutely somehow are not fickle meaning I can rearrange the terms and the rearrange series will still converge absolutely in converged to the same thing that the original series converged to.
So let me just make a brief comment after this theorem we proved that absolute convergence implies usual convergence and tie in a little bit to what I just said there.
So we'll show that the series sum from one to infinity of minus one to the n one over n this converges.
But note that this series does not converge absolutely.
Right because when I take absolute values I just get some of one over n which is the harmonic series which we just showed a few minutes ago is divergent.
Now we're going to move on to some convergence tests.
Now when it comes to convergence tests what these all follow from is basically what we know about geometric series and the following comparison tests.
Although when I do the proofs of the other convergence tests I won't actually state that I'm using the comparison test but that's kind of what's really getting used.
So the first test we have is the comparison test and the statement is the following.
Suppose we're all in a natural number we're looking at non-negative terms with one smaller than the other.
Then the conclusion is if the bigger one converges this implies that the smaller one converges
and if the smaller one diverges this implies that the bigger one diverges.
So how we're going to prove this is we're dealing with terms that are non-negative so we'll use this theorem about a series of non-negative terms.
So we use that theorem we proved that a series of non-negative terms converges if and only if the sequence of partial sums is bounded.
So if this series converges this implies that the sequence of partial sums is bounded which implies that means that the sequence of partial sums is bounded.
So that means that there exists something non-negative number such that for all natural numbers m some from n equals 1 to m of y sub n is less than or equal to b.
So this immediately implies that since all the x n's are less than or equal to the y n's we get that the mth partial sum corresponding to the x n's which is less than or equal to the mth partial sum for the y n's.
So this is also less than or equal to b for all m.
So the sequence of partial sums corresponding to the x n's is bounded and therefore by the theorem we proved which I think I have erased already.
So the series converges.
Now proving to is essentially it's kind of the same thing except the inequalities go the other way and the x n's are getting bigger which implies the y n's are also getting or the partial sums corresponding to the x n's is getting bigger.
So we are implying that the partial sums corresponding to the y n's are also getting bigger.
So now two if some if the series diverges then this implies that partial sums is unbounded.
We will now prove that this implies that the partial sums corresponding to the y n's are unbounded.
Now remember what it means for a sequence to be bounded is that there exists a non-negative number b such that for all m I have that bound.
So to say it's unbounded it means that for all b there exists a little m bigger than or equal to capital n such that that inequality is reversed.
So when we put here in a box what this actually means again this means that for all b bigger than or equal to zero there exists a m natural numbers so that the y n equals 1 to m is bigger than or equal to b.
That's what this means. So this is for all statements so I have to be able to prove it for every b b bigger than or equal to zero.
Now since we know that the partial sums corresponding to the x n's is unbounded this implies that there exists an m natural number such that sum from n equals 1 to m of x n is bigger than or equal to b.
Now let me say again just to show it's unbounded I should really have so for a sequence to be unbounded I should have an absolute value here is bigger than or equal to b but all of these terms is non-negative.
All of these terms are non-negative and therefore I can remove the absolute values and the same thing here.
So there exists a natural number m so that I have this and so let me put a little m zero there because we have to somehow show there exists a little m choose m to be this m zero.
So now if we look at the partial sums for the y n's this is bigger than or equal to because m equals m zero it's this term which is bigger than or equal to b.
Thus this proves partial sums corresponding to the y n is unbounded and therefore this series diverges.
So let's use the comparison theorem to consider series like 1 over n p series and prove when they do converge.
So theorem or p a real number.
Some n equals 1 to infinity 1 over n to the p converges if and only if p is bigger than 1.
So for the proof now why does the series converging imply p has to be bigger than 1.
So we'll do this by contradiction so suppose 1 over n to the p equals 1 to infinity converges.
So we'll do the proof by contradiction that p has to be bigger than 1. Suppose p is less than or equal to 1 then 1 over n to the p when p is less than or equal to 1 this is bigger than or equal to 1 over n.
And this implies since 1 over n since the series corresponding to 1 over n diverges implies that the series corresponding to 1 over n to the p diverges by the comparison test.
This is a direct contradiction to what we're assuming that the series converges.
So this must be false and p must be bigger than 1. So we've shown that if this series converges then p has to be bigger than 1.
So now let's prove the other direction and suppose p is bigger than 1 and prove that the p series 1 over n to the p converges.
So the way we're going to do this is kind of how we showed that the harmonic series is divergent.
So what we're going to do is first we're going to show that there is a sub sequence of partial sums corresponding to this guy that is bounded.
So remember to prove that this converges if and only if the sequence of partial sums is bounded.
And what we're going to first do kind of towards that is prove that there is a sub sequence of partial sums which is bounded.
So we make a first claim that the sequence of partial sums so s 2 to the k.
So this is sum from n goes 1 to 2 to the k of 1 over n to the p. So all k and natural number.
So this partial sum is bounded by a fixed number depending on p 1 plus 1 minus 2 to the minus p minus 1.
In other words there's this sub sequence of partial sums corresponding to s 2 to the k is bounded.
So again we do this by grouping these terms according to which power of 2 the denominator is between and then estimate from above now rather than from below like we did for the harmonic series.
So we have s 2 to the k equals 1. So again we're grouping these terms according to whether they're where they fall.
So this is just write this out one more time. This is equal to 1 plus 1 half to the p plus 1 over 3 to the p plus 1 over 4 to the p plus 1 over 5 to the p plus 1 over 8 to the p plus.
And then up until the last term.
Now I can write this as 1 plus the sum from l equals 1 to k.
So the number of blocks I have here. And then now the terms that come in each of these blocks 1 over n to the p.
And so now I estimate 1 over n not from below by this guy but from above by putting in the smallest n that n is in this block.
So this is less than or equal to 1 plus sum from l equals 1 to k.
So I'm from n equals 2 to the l minus 1 plus 1 to the l 1 over 2 to the l minus 1 plus 1 raised to the pth power.
Now this plus 1 is just making things bigger on the bottom. So if I remove it I've made things bigger overall for this fraction.
So this is less than or equal to sum from 1 equals l equals 1 to k. Some n equals 2 to the l minus 1 to the l times 1 over 2 to the p times l minus 1.
And now this thing here, if we do the same algebra we did a minute ago this is equal to 1 l equals 1 to k.
Now I have this term coming out. And then the number of terms I have here just like I did for the harmonic series.
This is equal to 2 to the l minus 1 plus 1 plus 1.
And now this is equal to 1 plus sum from l equals 1 to k.
And so this whole thing here is equal to 2 to the l minus 1. So I get 2 to the minus p minus 1 l minus 1.
Now I can shift this index. Actually this.
So I guess I could have made that sharper but it doesn't matter. I could shift this index l by no. Okay. So l starts at 1 and goes to k.
And here I have the sum l minus 1 so I can shift this index to go from now l equals 0 to k minus 1 to the minus p minus 1 l.
Okay. So I should have, this is like making a change of variables l prime equals l minus 1. And so let me put l prime instead of l.
Now this, so p is bigger than 1. Okay. So this is corresponds to a geometric series now. So let me actually rewrite this as 1 over 2 to the p minus 1 to the l prime.
Okay. When p is bigger than 1, then 1 over 2 to the p minus 1 is less than 1. So this thing is a k minus 1 partial sum for the series, geometric series with this as r. Right.
So this is always bounded above by. If I add up all the terms.
This equals that thing that I have up there 1 over 1 minus 2 to the minus p minus 1. Okay.
So that proves that along this subsequence, these partial sums are bounded by this fixed number.
And now I claim that this proves that the whole sequence of partial sums is bounded. Okay. In fact, by the same number.
For all, nm natural number.
nm is less than or equal to this number again. 1 minus 2 to the minus p minus 1. Okay.
So let m be a natural number. So we're trying to prove this bound. What do we do? We find a dietic number of number of the form 2 to the k bigger than m.
And since 2 to the m is bigger than m, I think that's maybe one of the first things we did by induction.
So we get that s to the m or s of m, which is the nth partial sum of non-negative terms. This is going to be less than or equal to since this is a monotone increasing guy.
This is going to be less than or equal to s to the 2m, which is less than or equal to 1 plus 1 minus 2 to the minus p minus 1. Okay.
Okay. That's the sequence of partial sums is bounded, which implies the series converges.
And that's the end of the proof. And I think we'll stop there.